Yes, mine.
Sorry, what am I sitting
Presenting this Together?
Yeah. So Ms. Brooker, is it? Yes. Yeah.
So if you're first up, so correct seat seat at the table.
So many of you in here today,
Party, It's always, well, this is where, this is the,
uh, the omnipotent petitions
Here. That's where the business happens.
A big debate that's taking place in the house.
But we're, uh, this is our priority.
So look now, thanks and welcome everyone.
And just, uh, while we've got all the subsequent medicine,
we'll just all introduce ourselves, um, so that, uh,
when you come to the table, you know who we are.
Um, Greg Connor. I'm the chair of the committee, uh, Greg.
So Carl van, member Parliament for Wnu.
Good. I'm Francisco Menez Hernandez.
I'm a green party list, Pete based in Dun.
Alright, so thank you. So, um, Ms. Brooker, um, welcome.
Um, we have, um, you for 10 minutes.
Um, take your submission as read,
but feel free to speak to it
and be good to have time for questions.
Wonderful. Welcome.
Uh, Tina Koto Kato.
I am, uh, Joe Robertson and I are both parents
and professionals, and we are presenting this petition
together to talk about the issue with you
and to look for solutions for really obvious problems.
We understand that there is complexity
and filtering the internet.
We're not naive to the challenges around resourcing
and budgets, and we're also not expecting perfect outcomes.
We know there is no silver bullet.
However, decisive action is essential in our solutions.
We are not talking about legal adult content.
Uh, we remove the categories, slavery porn from our petition
because there is too much overlap
with mainstream porn sites.
This petition is narrow and specific.
We won't go through the details of the submission again.
Uh, apart from briefly stating why we are here
and then addressing the submissions from DIA
and classification office, we hope that
through this process we can start to develop solutions
and not staying focused on the barriers.
There are millions of disturbing videos of animals
and people being abused freely available on the internet.
It's easy to assume that children wouldn't seek this out,
but an innocent search can lead to graphic content.
A child might hear the word rape, uh, at school
or on the news, look it up
and instantly be exposed
to real people being sexually assaulted.
The documents relating to this petition submitted
by the Department of Internal Affairs
and Classifications office highlight a lot of challenges
to regulating this content.
A few of which we'd like to address.
Firstly, in regards to policy changes.
A regulatory impact assessment is a welcome step.
Updating the films, videos,
and publications classification Act of 1993.
To meet today's online environment is essential.
We believe the DAA
and classifications office would support this update based
on, uh, reports we've read previously,
the classifications office
and their submission, uh, for the safer online services
and media platforms framework.
Stated quote, there is a need
to modernize the existing censorship function the chief
center has there.
These functions are powerful tools
and addressing the worst harms quickly.
And it also helpful in the international context.
End quote, New Zealand is falling
behind comparable countries in dealing with online harm.
Australia's now legislating
to raise social media limits to 16.
The UK looks to be following suit while New Zealand
struggles to address objectionable content like
sexual abuse material.
Secondly, the DA stated quote, legislative pro proposals
for internet filtering have been controversial in the past.
End, quote, opposition to previous proposals shared that
what was suggested was too broad
and not specific enough to satisfy censorship concerns.
As stated in our written submission,
we have received no pushback, concerns
or controversy around our proposed petition request
for multiple stakeholders.
In fact, the general theme is outrage
that nothing has been done about abuse content.
And thirdly, speaking of the technological changes,
advice papers from the previous minister, Barbara Edmund,
head of proposals for Safer Online Services media platforms.
Now, scrapped stated quote, it is no longer practical
for regulators to focus primarily
on specific pieces of content.
End quote. So we completely agree with Barbara Edmonds,
which is why we are suggesting a machine learning model
that uses AI to filter content similar, similar
to the internet Watch Foundation cs a block list
that the DAA is adopting.
This could be voluntarily used by ISPs and search engines.
ISPs have told us that they would welcome new filters
as long as there is confirmation that it is well audited
and that the government is comfortable with its use
as a voluntary tool.
We've sought advice from an expert in the filtering field
and an auditor that the DIA currently uses together.
Their advice suggests that this is possible for this kind
of technology to exist and be tightly controlled.
In the DIA submission, they have stated
that removing rate bestiality content could hinder accessing
sexual harm services.
We have to state that this suggestion is deeply offensive
and we believe it demands an apology.
Firstly, this statement is completely unfounded.
If you search women rape porn, for example,
there is no warning banner
and there is no sexual harm service being promoted.
Second, to suggest that the recorded rape
of someone is better left online for the world to consume
is deeply immoral
and insensitive to anyone who has experienced sexual harm.
Sorry, it makes me emotional.
I take time. No,
As a therapist, I am outraged by the suggestion,
but five years ago I asked three DIA officials if there was
ever gonna be anything done about videos
of women being raped online.
And they said, yes, we are working on that.
Six years ago, the classification office did a
fantastic piece of research.
You can, 71%
of New Zealand young people said they wanted more
filters and regulation.
Nothing systemic has changed since that research
or Joe's conversation with the DAA on this.
So we're here to talk about solutions, ideas for change
and how things might be different for our children.
We welcome any questions now?
Oh, thank you. And, uh, thank you for your, uh, for going
through that be very difficult.
Um, members, um, Mr.
Thanks Chair, and thanks for coming
and presenting to the petitions committee.
Uh, given the challenge, you know, you have with the,
talking about the topic,
question about the machine learning.
Where internationally have you seen that done successfully?
And what sort of, um, human resource does it require
as well to support that?
Like, just practically talk us through a little bit
of the mechanics of making it work.
Yeah, so the Internet Watch Foundation
currently uses that.
So they use a machine learning model, um,
which uses AI and web crawling.
Uh, they also have humans auditing that content.
So that is the, uh, model essentially
that the DIA is currently in the process of adopting.
So I don't, we've spoken with the IWF
and they've said that something like
that is potentially could happen for bestiality.
Um, and like we said, we've talked
to filtering experts who've also said that that's possible.
Yeah. Um, we would be, uh, like leading the world in terms
of that, but at some point
somebody has to be leading the world.
Yeah. Uh, and so yeah,
we've been given confirmation that it could happen.
Great. Just as a question, I mean, how, I mean, we,
we've got experts we can ask later,
but what are you filtering?
Is it image? Is it words? Is it sounds what, what?
How does it actually, how do you filter?
Yeah, so you would need to use the combination of videos,
images, and words.
So in order to exclude legal porn sites,
you couldn't just search for sexual content.
You know, you couldn't just search for nudity.
Uh, but if you search for that in combination
with certain words, you would end up
with rape sites specifically.
And words being spoken, uh, oral,
No written, written words.
Yeah. So you might, on a site, you'll find words.
They'll be the URL will be titled rape,
forced Woman, all types of things.
And then on the site itself, it will use the word rape
multiple times or it will use the word
bestiality or zoophilia.
So those are the most common words used.
So in combination with the videos.
So those words are up there to attract Yeah.
Traffic anyway. Yeah. Alright. Right. Okay.
Thank you for clarifying that.
I'm, my, my kids are a bit, uh, I'm bit older now.
No, no, it's fine. And if you are not on, like,
if you don't see the sites, it's hard to understand. Yeah.
Francisco, Uh, thank you Terry. Uh, thank you chair.
And thank you so much for your, um, presentation
and for bringing this forward.
Um, I was interested in the comment you made, how it would,
um, only block illegal websites and not legal webs.
So if there was, um, for example, um, you know,
pornography that would, uh, that went in,
that goes into the category that you're proposing
to Ben on a legal, um, porn site, it wouldn't,
the the proposal you're doing wouldn't block it?
No. So if you feel like it, you can go on PornHub
and if you search rape for example, they've removed anything
that's titled that and most mainstream sites have done the
same, uh, due to some really great advocacy work.
Yeah. So you're, we are focused on illegal sites only.
It's not, it would, it shouldn't, as long
as it's well audited block legal porn sites. Do
You think it should cover mainstream porn sites
that have content like that?
No, I don't think so.
I think that the best pathway there
would be age verification. Right.
So you, what you're really talking about is not
the, well the mainstream
Sites No.
To hip. How do you define a mainstream site?
Is that what's, what's the difference between Porn hub
and one of the sites we're talking about here?
They're titled with objectionable terms,
so they're titled bestiality or they're titled rape.
Yeah. There's no legal status
differently between these sites.
So mainstream porn site wouldn't use those words usually.
Um, that's why we took slavery porn out
because there's so much content on a mainstream site
that's titled with slavery.
Alright. And these are probably things we can, uh,
We can ask some Submitters, so thank you.
That's all right. Oh yeah, sorry.
So just, just on that one,
obviously we're gonna be hearing from both Internal affairs
and from the, um, census office,
you've seen their submissions.
Yeah. Do you have anything more to add?
Because I just, obviously this, this is part of the point,
which is what they're saying is that the distinction, uh,
is too difficult to make.
So you are categorically disagreeing with that.
Anything to add or you
feel like you've covered that one enough?
No, I mean, the one point
that I think might require an amendment in terms of policy,
where they've stated that in order for it to be bestiality,
it needs to be penetrative.
So I think that that might need to be amended. Right. Yeah.
But nothing around the rape, the legislation that would
No. And
The rape website. Okay. The
same question is, um, uh,
so in, um, so the, um, internal affairs, um, refers
to the select committee, inquire, I don't know which,
it didn't say which select committee.
It was just, uh, three years ago, um,
that considered the films
for there's publications Classification Act,
and they were looking like they were going to be in, uh,
calling for a, a unilateral filter, decided not to,
I haven't a chance to actually read their report.
Yeah. Do you understand why they decide not to do that?
And do you have anything, or maybe we
could short circuit a question.
Are you, you, it doesn't sound like you are asking for, um,
a unilateral, um, filter.
You okay. You still want voluntary. Yeah.
You want it to be done voluntary,
but specifically what you are wanting them to, to use, uh,
the international, um, the, the technologies
and lists which you're referring to.
Yeah. Okay. Alright.
Yeah. Which is where the process three years ago was,
there was opposition to it.
So in our conversation, for example,
with the previous chief sensor, David Shanks, I know
that he was also in opposition to
that 'cause it was too broad.
Right. So it wasn't narrow
and specific enough,
which is, we've been really clear about that. Yep.
Okay. That's really helpful. Thank you.
A a fairly obvious question,
but there's no one who's opposed to
what you're trying to do, is there?
No. So we are really, the, the, the discussion will be
around the difficulty cost Yeah.
Therefore of doing this that,
and that's where, so I just, obviously no one is,
we haven't got any submitted here saying No,
No, that's correct. We've
engaged really widely with various stakeholders,
internet service providers, um, different kind
of stakeholder groups in New Zealand
and we've had no opposition.
So lemme just, yeah. The point of view
that people come back for industry yet.
Got it. Well, look, thank you. Very
One such to there. Yeah. No.
So just in terms of cost, just so I'm clear, so,
so that the clear action points are
that we need the legislation changed
around the definition of BCLT
Potentially. Yeah.
I, I would want some more clarity on that. Yeah.
And then the other than that,
the main cost is the resource that's going to be required
for the enforcement of it?
That's correct.
No, there wouldn't be any enforcement
because it's not, it's,
It's voluntary. Okay. Yeah. So,
so for the
implementation of it, like where's the, where
The implementation, So the development
of the machine learning model to create your block list
and then the auditor Yeah.
And then the auditor and you, for you both those things
would ideally sit within the Census's office?
I think it would make sense to sit with DA given
that they currently operate the D-C-E-F-S
and they'll operate the IWF list.
Okay. And your estimation initially when we first spoke
about this, I think it was, there was
the resources might have been like that.
Obviously it's been a little bit of a moving, moving feast.
What's your esti most current recent, um, estimation as to
what kind of human resource would be required?
Well, we, we've actually asked that question
so many times don't have a clear answer.
No. Yeah.
Um, so we had one person say, you know,
this will cost this piece of technology.
The model will cost $200,000
and somebody else say it'll cost up to a million dollars.
We've asked how many staff members would need
to be involved, and we don't have clarity on that. Okay.
Yeah. Alright. Thank you.
Uh, there's one more thing.
The assumptions, these sites are all hosted overseas. Yeah.
There's, there's none of the,
you haven't discovered any of these being hosted.
No. And that's why it's not in about enforcement. Yeah.
Because it's about blocking it at Yeah.
To come into the country because
It would, it would be presumably, well, it's no
criminal offense to be hosting anything like this in
New Zealand anyway, so we are talking overseas sites.
Yeah. So, yeah. Alright. Look, uh, thank you very much.
Um, you know, wish, wish all our submitters were quite
as concise and prepared and and knowledgeable.
So it's, you've really given us a lot certainly
to be asking questions of the, um, follow
of your fellow submitters.
So thank you very much and
you're certainly welcome to remain.
Thank you, um, for the submissions, look, I, I'm aware
that the Department of Internal Affairs,
I think are on a, uh, time.
So well I'll invite you, uh, up so that we don't, uh,
run out of time pressure.
So thank you. We, we certain Yes, please. Yes. Sorry.
They'll, we uh, they'll be in the hot seats now.
Alright. As, uh, Mr. Law.
Yes. Yes.
Taylor co committee chair members.
Um, just to introduce myself properly,
I'm Nick Law Policy Manager internal affairs
for a team called Media Content and Online Safety.
And with me is Jared Mullen.
Jared is the director of the department's Digital
Safety Regulatory Group.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak
to you today about the petition
to require internet service providers
to filter rate content, child sex, abuse, and material
and bestiality content.
We'd like to acknowledge the petitioners Holly Brooker
and Joe uh, Robertson
for the effort they have put into raising awareness
of the risk of harm to children by exposure
to illegal material and the effort in gathering almost
11,000 signatures on this petition.
I don't intend to read through the department's written
submission, but we will highlight some key areas
for the committee to consider, such as what will be required
to expand and mandate the filter
as proposed in the petition.
Although I do appreciate the submitters have just, uh,
altered that slightly, but I will stick to
as the petition as it was written.
I'll first go through a bit of background on the filter
that the department operates.
The department administers the classification act
and this sets out what material is considered objectionable
or illegal, such as child sexual abuse material,
which we often refer to as CS A.
We also operate the digital child exploitation filtering
system to prevent and deter access
to child sexual abuse material.
And we call this D SEFs.
The D SEFs blocks access to webpages identified
as hosting CS a
and as one of several tools that we use to take, uh,
to address this type of content.
It is an early intervention
to stop people from inadvertent low motivation access
to CS a and enables an education response
for people curious about this content,
the filter will not stop the most determined people
from accessing this content.
And for those people, we must rely on different approaches.
Many internet service providers are voluntarily using DCFS
on their services, and this covers about 95%
of internet users in New Zealand.
The voluntary takeup of the filter works
because child sexual abuse material can be confidently
identified and is universally considered to be abhor.
The filter will soon undergo a significant upgrade
through an agreement with the Internet Watch Foundation,
which we expect to be operational in the first
quarter of next year.
This upgrade will increase the size
of the department's filter list from a few hundred URLs
hosting CSA to tens of thousands.
It will also reduce the time
and resource required to manually update the list,
which means our investigators can focus on the often lengthy
and highly sensitive investigations into digital
child exploitation.
Our assessment of the petition's request is
that the changes would be a significant departure from the
current voluntary arrangement.
The scope of the change requested in the petition would
require legislative amendments to the Classification Act
and likely consequential amendments to other acts.
The classification Act was enacted in 1993 well
before the internet as we know it today.
The ACT does not include provisions
for a mandated internet filtering system,
nor does it empower the government
or direct, uh, government
to direct internet service providers to filter
and block content on their services.
To do both of these things as requested in the petition,
would require a clear mandate from Parliament
under a mandated system.
Compliance and transparency would also need
to be prescribed in legislation to empower the department
or other regulatory body
to monitor the ISPs implementation of the filter.
We are also concerned that extending the filter
to more categories could unintentionally acc uh,
restrict access to legal material
rape am bestiality content sometimes will not meet the
threshold for objectionable,
unlike child sexual abuse material,
which is always obviously illegal.
For example, some adults consensually create content
that depicts rape.
Unfortunately, there are also incident
where people will record real rape
and share it as content differentiating between the two.
And the effect of this content is complex.
We could not confidently block rape
or bestiality content in the same way that we do
for child sexual abuse material.
If we were to do this, we would run the risk
of blocking legal content
and violating the Bill of Rights Act,
which includes the right to freedom of expression
and access to information.
So while rape and bestiality content are categories
of objectionable material under section three
of the Classification Act,
distinguishing the two is a matter of careful consideration
by experts like the department's investigators
and the classification office
and the this, their expertise is recognized
in section four of the act.
If rape and bestiality content were included in a filter,
then we would need to consider
what would be an acceptable risk of over blocking material
and how would that be mitigated to protect the government
and internet service providers from liability
if legal content were blocked?
The petition is noted in their submission
that existing machine learning technology can scan
and detect sites hosting rape and BCL content.
We are not aware of technology that can do this to the level
of accuracy needed for a government filter
without human review.
First, automated detection
and filtering tools work better for private use,
for example, in households
where a higher error rate is accepted by customers
because they are the ones exercising control over
their internet use.
The other complication with automated filtering is
that developing filtering lists requires content
to train the machine.
Developing this technology in New Zealand privately would be
difficult 'cause it would need
to be trained on very large sets of images and videos.
The Classification Act does not authorize proactive access
to objectional material, including for the use of training
and auditing a machine learning tool.
And the department does not have the authority
to grant legal access in this way.
The classification office can grant exemptions
for specific illegal content,
but it cannot grant an exemption
to generally access a class of the legal content.
Finally, expanding a mandating filter would also require
significant departmental resources to operate it,
particularly because automated content detection has its
limits and should not replace human oversight.
This level of activity cannot be funded from baseline
funding for which the department uses
for the highest priority work like investigations into child
sexual abuse material.
That concludes our comments.
We do share a common goal with the petitioners
to reduce harm from illegal content
and we commend their work in this area.
Thank you again for inviting the department
to submit and present today.
We are happy to answer your questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, Mr. Bates.
Thanks chair. Thanks very much for the, uh, presentation
and the detail.
Um, a couple of different questions.
Firstly, just noting the leg
legislative changes you said would be necessary.
Um, is there anything other than obviously
the parliament taking view that they want
to make those changes, stopping those changes occurring?
Like, I'm just trying to understand if that's just a,
this needs legislative change to be able to do it
or if there's a reason why we would not want to undertake
that legislative change from your perspective?
Uh, it would be a matter of priority whether this kind
of work was undertaken.
It would be a matter for the Minister
of Internal Affairs to consider.
Okay. Um,
and then secondly, uh, you mentioned the Bill of Rights Act
and the, uh, challenges with
blocking essentially legal content
and the legal liability that could create, um,
if you're getting that wrong, um, surely
if someone that said, you've blocked our content
and it was legal content
and then you unblocked it,
the legal liability would be non-existent.
Like you've reacted to the concern,
like you can't go from blocking.
Well, I would imagine you can't go from blocking something
that is actually legal
then end up in court the next day.
It would depend on the specific set
of circumstances in the scenario.
For example, the blocking of a legitimate business
by accident, um, which could occur, uh,
could result in a significant liability.
Uh, but there will be other forms of liability as well.
Okay. And then, sorry Chip, go ahead. Is that alright?
Um, you talked about the, the inability to
provide, uh, access to illegal material for training,
essentially, um, ai I suppose in,
in reality this is a form of that.
Uh, but you also spoke about the fact
that the act was created prior, essentially to the internet.
So regardless of this petition, isn't that a challenge
that needs to be dealt with anyway?
Like being able to have a mechanism for,
uh, improving our ability to block what is illegal
by utilizing examples of what is illegal?
This specific issue relates to that,
the exemption for a class.
Um, there's a restriction
that currently exists within the classification act
because the exemption only relates to a,
a specific piece of content.
And, um, so it's, it would be that kind
of class exemption is not considered
as part of the act at the moment.
But it, my point is that sounds like something we need
to deal with more broadly anyway,
given the shift from pre-internet to post-internet
and these sorts of challenges going forward.
Uh, in previous work we've identified there are
significant issues with the acts outdated nature,
but it would be a matter for the government
to consider whether that was required to be worked
Through. And my last
question chair, um, you spoke about innovation
and sort of the cost of solving the problem.
Um, and forgive me, I spent a lot more time in
the private world than I have in the public sector.
Um, but is the cost associated with solving that,
um, in your mind driven by the fact that it's sort
of government trying to solve it in a typical way as opposed
to, you know, surely we could give this sort of problem to
IT experts and,
and get it come up with a innovative cost-effective solution
to do it quickly if we don't put a whole lot of rules
around why it can't happen?
I'm not sure that's something I I can express a
view, a view on.
Okay. Um, but for the department to undertake that work
or support the development of that type
of innovation would be a very significant piece of work.
And would the department be, oh, so
Debate. You had a pretty good run
when you're gonna sit here
and insult public servants.
Um, Mr. Fleming Wasn't an insult, it was a question.
Um, thank you very much. Your submission.
I just have a, um, a reasonably simple question just
because I'm trying to narrow down, uh,
'cause obviously since the petition was originally raised,
um, it's been a moving feast, so things have evolved.
So, um, the, I understand the petitions now are not asking
for a, a mandated filter.
They're actually asking for something very, it, it seems
to me that it's very achievable
and it's around essentially recognizing rape
and bestiality as always problematic terms.
So the question I have is that I'm, I'm struggling
to understand why, why we should,
as it sounds like what's been said in both your oral
submission and the written submission
and in the, in the census as well, is that we should, uh,
continue to make allowance for the fact that,
that some consenting adults want to use those terms
to describe their activities.
Is that, is that what I'm hearing?
Because if, if, so it sounds
to me like we just, so I'm sorry.
It's, it's either your right to do that
or our right to protect children.
So you need to find some other language
to describe your consenting activities
That that is a political consideration. Yes.
Ah, so it is a political one. Yes.
So it's within the act at the moment.
Um, no, uh, that's, I didn't mean to apply that.
It, it has the degree to which you expand the definition
or allow, uh, okay.
Latitude in that definition
or make that trade off between what is able
to be stopped versus what people's rights are in terms
of the freedom to Gotcha.
Okay. That that is a balance that is
Okay. And at the moment it is,
it is the other way
that I'm obviously as surprised I am.
That is the way that's skewed at the moment.
Yes. The question is what is the role
of a government filter?
And the threshold is set in legislation at objectionable.
So you have to be very confident that the content
that you're blocking is at that threshold.
Whilst other, uh, internet service providers
or privately people could have a lower threshold,
lower level of acceptance, they could adopt something
that's lesser than that for a government operated
filter. The threshold is in the
Ation. So again, this is yet another
advantage to not, I mean,
there's, there's, there's many advantages to not going
for a mandated filter.
And the liability or potential liability is yet another one
of those reasons because that's not go, it's, it's,
it's gonna play out very differently in a
voluntary context, isn't it?
The voluntary context at the moment is,
is is working really, really well
for child sexual exploitation?
The previous submitters stated, yeah, most
of New Zealand's ISPs, telecommunications companies,
tech companies, yes, uh, are minded to
prioritize safety on their platforms.
Right. Uh, they want to do that.
Uh, but the threshold is very high
because obviously there's a commercial imperative as well
that comes in with that.
So they would like for government
to basically be the guarantor of what is legal
or illegal, uh, in terms of what is placed on the filter.
Uh, basically to, to give them that assurance.
If that assurance is
provided, uh, as we currently do for them with the, uh,
d SEPs filter, then they're very happy to apply that.
Right. Uh, and cover 95% of New Zealand,
uh, right subscribers.
Thank you. So would the DAPs, the expansion
of the DAPs filter into these categories, would
that have the risk of reducing the effectiveness of it?
Um, it certainly our submission, uh, canvases that risk.
Uh, and Nick mentioned in his introduction that a lot of
that is the careful professional judgment
of the chief sensor in her office, as well as
the human in the moment judgment of an inspector.
Uh, while it is theoretically possible to build
and train an AI machine that has not
yet been done for this type of content,
I don't think we can also speak to the take up of ISPs to,
uh, um, if it was expanded.
So that is not something that we know whether we would
maintain the current level that we have,
which is very high. Sure.
Uh, we, we do know that in the aftermath
of the Christchurch attack, uh, many ISPs moved, uh,
proactively to, uh, restrict access to that, that video.
Uh, and we also know that they have worked collaboratively
with us over many years to restrict this type
of illegal content child sexual abuse content as well.
So if, if my ISP is a Russian one can,
how does, how will it work there?
Or do I, is there a filtering system within New Zealand? Uh,
Not that we'll catch.
It depends On how you access it.
It depends on how you access it.
If you are accessing it, uh, over the open internet
through a New Zealand ISP, uh, than
whatever New Zealand ISP you are accessing it through will,
That's the responsibility lies.
Yes. But can I directly,
and again, this is a broader question,
can I directly in New Zealand legally access
a Russian ISP without a New Zealand ISP
or English or American or anything?
Um, That one,
the experts in the back might know that, uh,
Yeah. Yeah.
The, my hesitation Mr.
Chairman is, I, I don't want to necessarily give, uh,
people at home ideas as to how they might Right.
Circum fair enough.
Mr. On that, on that point about, uh,
you might not maintain the,
We, we'd happy to answer those questions in a confidential
session, perhaps Mr.
Chair. Uh, if, if you wish,
Um, your point about you might not maintain the level
of ISP engagement, if the change, would it be able
to be delineated?
So you've got your sort of base filter that's currently used
to maintain that, and then an optional additional filter,
uh, so that you don't have any, um, winds down
and current engagement
of ISPs in the current version of the filter.
I, I'm reluctant to speculate on how we might
operationalize that part of the proposal.
It's not something we've done the work on to be able
to provide the committee with the advice on
how we would structure something like that.
Alright. Look, look, thanks very much
and that we've got gone slightly over time,
but that just some indication of, uh, how much, uh, we,
we've got to learn on this.
So, look, and, and as far
as your offer on the confidentiality,
we, we haven't got time yet.
We may well come back to you on that. That, that's perfectly
Perfectly Fine.
In fact, you might, I might invite you to, um, indicate as
to why that might be useful for us too.
Um, will you happy to liaise with our clerk
and just say what, what, why it might be useful for us
to have you back and we can do that confidentially
so that this we're not
Certainly could be a bit more
open about our sources. Alright.
No, that, that's with, so if you could liaise
with the clerk on that, we'll, we'll discuss that, um,
and let that, thank you very much.
Thank you. Very informative.
Um, we'll go back into order
to the classification office please, uh,
uh, our c and uh, deputy Chief center.
So do it. Thank you.
I think you've, you've, you've heard, uh, yeah.
So look, thank you very much and welcome. And I
Look forward to hearing from you.
Thank you. I'm Caroline Flora, the chief sensor,
and this is Rupert a Hanson, the Deputy Chief Sensor,
and we welcome the opportunity to talk
with you about this important issue today.
And we acknowledge Holly
and Joe for all of the work to get to this point.
I'm not gonna go over our whole
submission, I take it as read.
We'll try and leave, um, time for questions.
But I will start with a bit of background
and clarity about our role.
So we are an independent crown entity and content regulator.
Our roles and functions are set out in the classification
Act 1993.
And broadly we classify material that might need
to be restricted or banned.
This can include films, books, videos, games.
And importantly in this context, online content, uh,
potentially objectionable
or illegal content is it comes
to us via crown agencies in the court.
So that includes DIA police and sometimes customs.
The majority of it is child sexual abuse material followed
by content promoting terrorism and violent extremism.
So our classification function is quasi-Judicial
and classifications are legally enforceable so
that a determination
that a publication is objectionable might form a a,
a large part of a criminal charge.
So we are not responsible for investigations
or enforcement of the classification act.
That's the role of DIA in police.
So this petition raises very valid concerns about access
to harmful or objectionable material online.
Our research shows that New Zealanders find it difficult
to protect children and people online.
And our 2018 research on young people in porn showed
that three outta four young New Zealanders had seen porn
by the age of 17 and one in four by the age of 12.
And so, while I know that the subject of this petition
isn't about young people accessing legal adult content,
we consider that there can be grades of this content
that the petition does cover.
And I'll address that in a sec.
We don't have any survey evidence on the prevalent
prevalence of seeing objectionable content,
all the categories of content included in the petition.
However, we have been consulting with young people
around the country this year
and they tell us that they have seen objectionable content.
So under the current system,
new Zealanders can't always be prevented from accessing this
content, even if it has been classified.
This content by definition is harmful.
A accessing it, viewing it,
or sharing objectionable content is a criminal offense and
therefore represents a risk for people who view it, even if
that's unintentional
or if they were unaware that it was illegal.
So in our view and in the spirit of the classification Act,
content that is illegal under New Zealand law should not
be freely available.
As such, it is logical to take preventative measures
that may support this outcome if measures are evidence-based
likely to be effective in practice
and are consistent with New Zealand law,
including the right freedom of expression.
But the categories of, um,
content included in this petition do raise a couple
of issues that have been well canvassed today.
They're not the same as the categories in
the classification act.
And so figuring out content
to filter wouldn't be straightforward.
It would exclude other categories of illegal content
and it could prevent adults from accessing,
uh, legal content.
Um, under the act determining whether a publication is
objectionable is a matter of expert judgment by our team,
the ACT states that the publication is deemed
to be objectionable if it promotes or supports
or tends to promote or support a specified
list of activities.
And some of these criteria are relevant
to the categories raised in the petition described
as rape content, child sexual abuse material,
and bestiality content.
Broadly speaking, sexual material involving children
and young people and sexual content involving humans
and animals is in most cases straightforward
and will lead to content being banned.
I do wanna clarify something that was mentioned earlier.
There is no requirement for penetrative sex with animals
to come within the scope of the act.
However, content that may be described
as rape porn is unclear
and could potentially include a wide range of content,
which may or may not be illegal.
And this is problematic as a basis for legal interventions,
and it's not a category
or term used for the purposes
of classification law enforcement.
So Parliament decided the criteria
and the categories of content deemed to be objectionable.
And as a regulator, we are agnostic in terms of the type
of content that could potentially be included in an expanded
filtering system.
But we consider that any extension
of the current system needs to consider all of the criteria
for objectionable content.
And what I mean by that is violent extremist
and terror related content is arguably just as
or potentially more harmful than, uh, the categories
of content identified in this petition.
It's all illegal, it's all harmful.
Um, so the question, the question to ask is why block only?
Some of it? Um, DIA has already explained
how the voluntary filter works,
so I won't go into that again.
The petition was originally calling for ISPs
to have a legally, a legal requirement to comply
with it rather than requiring on voluntary uptake.
And the petition stated
that this would not require a legislative change, it would,
um, for a legal mandate,
but we know they have changed the state
of the petition today.
Um, we still, we still consider that the, um, determination
of the content is a matter for expert judgment.
Um, finally, under our current system,
objectionable content has a clear legal meaning
with associated criminal sanctions.
And this is a key aspect of balancing freedom of expression
and harm prevention, ensuring the integrity
of the content regulatory system
and maintaining New Zealand's trust in it.
Our view that is
that any mandatory filter would require a greater level
of certainty that content being blocked was in fact
objectionable under New Zealand law to minimize the risk of,
of legal content being blocked.
As such, any mandated filter should apply to specific pieces
of content rather than categories.
And content added to a mandated block list would need
to be classified and determined to be objection.
But under a voluntary system, there is a greater level
of flexibility, um, and it may be reasonable
and justifiable for determining content to be added
to a list of blocked URLs.
So we're happy to take any questions.
Alright, thank you. Thank you.
Um, I, I understand, I think why, uh, it might be difficult
to kind of distinguish, um, you know, particularly with, um,
ray porn because with, you know, it's hard to say
who's pretending if there's like paid actors doing it versus
the genuinely infant sense of stuff.
But I don't understand how it could be difficult
to determine, for example, things like bestiality.
It's not difficult. It's not difficult. No.
CAM and bestiality content is, is really not difficult.
Right. It's not automatic though. Yeah.
And as DIA explained
before, even the very comprehensive CSA filter
that is in operation now needs quality checks to make sure
that the content is actually CS a
It's just, It's just a supplementary question to that.
But, and,
and I'm sorry, I'm just, um, first engagement, all
of this was obviously through this petition,
but I'm still just fascinated by the idea
that we somehow need to protect the ability of
consenting adults to defend
what they're uploading as this kind of rapes.
Okay. Because it's active. Uh, what am I missing here?
Why, why, why should that, why would we want to, why, why,
why is that a freedom of speech that's so important
to be protected that we run the risk of our
children coming across that material?
That's, that's, and
that's similar question to what I was asking.
Yes. I I must be missing something.
I think that's a great question for parliament. Right?
Okay. So we operate under the existing act, the threshold
for objectionable is where it is.
Right. Um, and we are here to uphold freedom of expression.
Got it. So if it doesn't cross that threshold,
what we are saying is government intervention
to block something that doesn't cross that is tricky.
However, if ISPs voluntarily want to, right?
They're a business, their customers can sign up to that.
Okay. That's really clear. Thank you
Very much. And you're
probably thinking of direct depictions of events.
So we've talked about websites and videos
and these are direct depictions,
but the act covers a very broad range
of publications including films
and books, um,
and basically any other things.
Mm. So you do have those issues addressed in, in many books
or in comics
or even in films where actions are depicted that,
that you might watch on your television.
Sure. So those are the type of, um,
we have a very broad range.
So yes. Where a direct event is occurring
and that's captured on video.
It's a lot more simple than when you are looking at Yeah.
A broader range of publications. Okay.
So when material comes to you for classification,
there's only, there's only the three
pathways you were saying
There are other pathways.
So members of the public, well
I was Gonna say
The public who discover parents who discover.
So Can they come direct to you or come through? They
Can, can apply for leave to submit
content or I can call it in.
And um, since 2021, I've also been given new powers
to call in terrorist
and extremist related content very quickly,
make interim classifications.
So, um, it can come to us far in a number of means,
but it broadly comes to us from investigative agencies
Quickly being instantly Quickly.
So if, so if terrorist
and violent extremist content is circulating online
and we've got a concern about the damage it will do here in,
we can make a determinant a determination
immediately, right?
Yeah. Um, and we have
to issue a final decision within 20 working days.
Alright. And notify the public of that obviously as well.
Alright, Thank you. Thank
You very much. Thank
you. Very, very, very clear.
And uh, finally, uh, internet Service
Providers Association of New Zealand.
Oh, that can on Zoom. Okay.
Right. Uh, who we got Mr. Hanes? Is it, it?
Have we got, can you hear me?
Yes, I can. There you go.
Look, we're all up and running. So look, thanks very much.
Uh, I don't have you been list,
have you been online the whole presentation?
Yeah. Not the whole time, but most of it.
Oh good. All. Well thank you.
Um, we've got you for 10 minutes.
We've, um, we've had your submission, um,
but feel free to speak to it
and uh, hopefully need some time for questions.
Thank you.
Koto. Koto Koto.
My name's David Haynes
and I represent the Internet Service Providers
Association of New Zealand.
Our members, um, are, we've got quite a number
who are quite small to medium sized ISPs.
Uh, and interestingly the three ISPs that make sense, um,
went to with their stakeholder engagement.
None of those are I spans members.
So we first became aware of this when, um, we were invited
by your committee secretariat, um,
to put in a submission, uh, which we did.
And uh, and then we were invited to, um,
to appear here today.
Um, we agree with the petitioner that this type
of objectional material causes harm.
That harm should be prevented
and a method of filtering it is needed.
Now our members, uh, are well aware of
and use the digital child exploit
exploitation filtering system.
Uh, and from our perspective, if this sort of, um,
content is to be filtered, then just expanding
that existing capability would be the simplest
and most straightforward thing to do.
Um, and if filtering becomes
mandatory, uh, then implementing a single filtering system
for all objectional material would be easier than having
to implement multiple filtering systems.
Um, apart from that, I haven't got that much more to say.
Um, I'll read you the conclusion of, um, of our submission,
uh, where we recommend that, um, the Department
of Internal Affairs be directed to expand the scope
of DC EFS so
that it covers all illegal objectional material.
Um, we as an organization don't take any position on whether
filtering should be compulsory that decision is
for government to make, but if compulsory fil compulsory
filtering is adopted, then ICE spans would be wish
to be consulted on any draft regulations
and be included in any discussions on how implementation
and ongoing costs would be financed and managed.
Alright. Don't have much more
to say than that, I'm afraid.
Right, thank you. Um, look great
'cause we now got time for some questions.
Um, the D-C-E-F-S, um, which is the, um,
current, um, block system.
Yeah. Is that, are you aware of that?
Yes. Yeah, we're very aware of that and our members use it
And they use it and it's, uh,
considered effective and efficient.
They use it. Uh, they don't have any opinion on
how effective and efficient it might be.
Alright. Okay. Mr. Faring,
Uh, thank you very much Dave for your submission, both,
uh, written and oral just
so I can just understand the context a little better.
So the three, uh, ISPs that the petitioners, um, spoke
with being one vote, uh,
well they now call everyone keeps changing their names.
One spark in two degrees. Yes.
Um, they account for what percentage of
internet service provision in, in, uh, New Zealand.
Oh, those three would account for the vast majority of,
um, of internet service provision.
So maybe no, the other way flipping around in terms
of your members would account for what, maybe 25% in total?
Um, that would be a guess,
but yeah, I wouldn't disagree with that.
And how many, uh, members? Uh, about 2025.
Okay. Alright. And they are all
voluntarily using the filter?
I have been told they're using it. Um, okay.
There are some areas where for technical reasons,
they're not applying it
because their customer is not taking their DNS.
Uh, and that has to be, um, approached another way.
And I could, I'm in danger here of, of launching into sort
of technical stuff, which I'm not completely familiar with.
Uh, but domain name service, uh,
there are people who don't take
the DNS from our members
and it's through the DNS that that filtering is applied.
Um, there are other,
I suppose there are other things out there which don't get
filtered by our members.
So I mean, every Google device, uh,
automatically has, um, the Google's DNS hard
hardwired hardcoded into it by default.
So if you are using a Google device,
you are not having your content filtered
by your ISP you.
There, there are ways of doing that.
Um, and it's all easily if this becomes mandatory
or even if it just becomes, um, uh, optional,
there are ways of applying it.
Uh, sorry,
I'm making this sound more complicated than it is.
Alright, look, can, can I ask a question?
You're obviously well immersed in the, um, in the,
in this world, is any attempt to try
to block this content?
Is it, you know, it's a hard question to ask you,
but is is it doomed to fail?
I don't, I don't think it's doomed to fail.
Um, I've been listening with interest to
what other people were talking about before I came on, um,
and I've learned a lot of it now about what the law says
and how, um, things are, um,
dealt with by, um, the sensor.
Uh, if this system
is implemented
or needs to be implemented, then it needs to be done
by someone like DIA, uh,
and we will accept whatever system they put in.
I've listened to, um, the DIA people talk about
how they might end up filtering out more than
just the illegal stuff.
Um, and I can see that that
is a legal problem.
Uh, our members would voluntarily filter
unless some of their customers said they don't want that.
Uh, and if the filtering is mandated by law,
then our members of course would all apply with the law.
Um, how difficult it is.
Uh, I'm to, to actually implement
and do the filtering within DIA, um, I don't know.
Uh, I'd have to just listen to what DIA said
and believe them, I'm afraid.
Alright. Okay, gentlemen.
Alright, well thank you very much.
It's a, a good, um, bookend to our, um, submissions today.
Uh, thank you David. Um, been very helpful.
So look, um, just, I'll just go back to our submitters.
Was there anything, um, just briefly that you've heard
that you'd just like to comment on that from,
or that's not, nothing in particular that you, um,
Yeah, I think just echoing of what,
Um, Could you please Come
to the tape? Oh, sorry.
Yes, we want tape.
Um, I just wanna echo
what Caroline Flora the Chief Census said, which is
that their role is around individual pieces of content.
You know, that's really important,
but it's, it's not gonna work in this where we need
to address a class a genre.
And so I think everybody's agreed with that,
which is why we need a new system.
What's happening now isn't working.
Alright, thank you.
That was just sort of, um, thing I, I thought we might hear.
So very useful. Uh, look, thank you very much.
And what will happen now is the, the will, um,
committee will consider all this evidence we win
and considering possibility of some more.
And then we will report back to Parliament on this.
So, um, you'll be, uh, you'll be advised accordingly.
So thank you very much. Thanks everyone for your patience,
uh, running slightly over time, but, uh, understandably so.
Thank you.